Title: DIEP flap breast reconstruction--new experience.
Journal: Acta chirurgiae plasticae (2001)

Abstract:
One of the important microsurgical procedures in our department is breast reconstruction after ablations. For many years, the standard method was reconstruction with autologous tissues--a free TRAM flap with a recipient vessels vasa mammaria. We are convinced that this give very satisfactory results with microsurgical safety of operations. We use this method of reconstruction in 17-20 patients per year. The standard time of unilateral reconstruction is 2.5-4 hours, of bilateral reconstruction 4-6 hours. Postoperative morbidity in the abdominal region is, as a rule, associated with a weakening of the abdominal wall and the development of hemias (Galli et al., 1992); a perforator flap in which neither muscle nor fasciae are used creates the prerequisite condition for markedly reduced the morbidity associated with the site of flap collection. Although we used a perforator flap three times for reconstructions of the extremities as early as three years ago, we began to use it for breast reconstruction from the beginning of 2000. No doubt this late use of a large skin flap supplied by 1-2 perforators was due to a lack of trust in the provision of adequate blood perfusion for the large amount of tissue of the flap. From the beginning of 2000, in the course of five months, nine DIEP flaps were used for breast reconstructions, in two cases for bilateral reconstruction. In two instances sensory nerves of the flap were sutured to the branch of the intercostal nerves at the site of insertion. Seven flaps healed p.p.i; in two instances we were faced with the complication of postoperative venostasis, calling for revision and connection of the superficial venous system of the flap to the circulation. Subsequent healing was without complications. Preparation of the flap appears to be relatively easy, and the only pitfall is the selection of a suitable perforator. The operation is longer by half an hour than the classical free TRAM; when the sensory nerve of the flap is sutured, it is ca 1 hour longer. We like to use the DIEP flap for breast reconstruction, and it is a reliable method even for the reconstruction of large pendulous breasts. The donor site morbidity is significantly lower.