Title: Myth-Busting the DIEP Flap and an Introduction to the Abdominal Perforator Exchange (APEX) Breast Reconstruction Technique: A Single-Surgeon Retrospective Review.
Journal: Plastic and reconstructive surgery (2019)

Abstract:
BACKGROUND: Anatomical variations in perforator arrangement may impair the surgeon's ability to effectively avoid rectus muscle transection without compromising flap perfusion in the deep inferior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap. METHODS: A single surgeon's experience was reviewed with consecutive patients undergoing bilateral abdominal perforator flap breast reconstruction over 6 years, incorporating flap standardization, pedicle disassembly, and algorithmic vascular rerouting when necessary. Unilateral reconstructions were excluded to allow for uniform comparison of operative times and donor-site outcomes. Three hundred sixty-four flaps in 182 patients were analyzed. Operative details and conversion rates from DIEP to abdominal perforator exchange ("APEX") arms of the algorithm were collected. Patients with standardized DIEP flaps served as the controlling comparison group, and outcomes were compared to those who underwent abdominal perforator exchange conversion. RESULTS: The abdominal perforator exchange conversion rate from planned DIEP flap surgery was 41.5 percent. Mean additional operative time to use abdominal perforator exchange pedicle disassembly was 34 minutes per flap. Early postsurgical complications were of low incidence and similar among the groups. One abdominal perforator exchange flap failed, and there were no DIEP flap failures. One abdominal bulge occurred in the DIEP flap group. There were no abdominal hernias in either group. Fat necrosis rates (abdominal perforator exchange flap, 2.4 percent; DIEP flap, 3.4 percent) were significantly lower than that historically reported for both transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous and DIEP flaps. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed no added risk when using pedicle disassembly to spare muscle/nerve structure during abdominal perforator flap harvest. Abdominal bulge/hernia was nearly completely eliminated. Fat necrosis rates were extremely low, suggesting benefit to pedicle disassembly and vascular routing exchange when required. CLINICAL QUESTION/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic, III.