Title: Analysis of online materials regarding DIEP and TRAM flap autologous breast reconstruction.
Journal: Journal of plastic, reconstructive & aesthetic surgery : JPRAS (2023)

Abstract:
Online resources have become a mainstay for health information, and it is vital that such resources maintain accessible literacy levels to empower informed decision making. Previous studies have shown that the online resources regarding post-mastectomy breast reconstruction are of low readability; however, none have evaluated specific online resources regarding the most common procedures within autologous breast reconstruction, limiting analysis to the results of generic searches. This study sought to discover the readability of online, patient-directed resources regarding the Deep Inferior Epigastric Perforator (DIEP) and Transverse Rectus Abdominis Muscle (TRAM) flaps, the most utilized autologous flaps in breast reconstruction, using health literacy analysis. We hypothesized that the online materials regarding DIEP and TRAM flaps would yield literacy scores above the 6th-grade reading level, as recommended by the American Medical Association, despite previous literature and readability recommendations. Google searches for "DIEP breast reconstruction" and "TRAM breast reconstruction" were conducted. All patient-directed, non-sponsored websites found within the first three pages of the search underwent analysis using a variety of readability formulae. Both DIEP and TRAM resources were well above the 6th-grade reading level according to every metric used, and there was no significant difference in the reading level between the two procedures. Based on these results, significant work was needed to simplify the online resources to be more understandable for patients; these authors propose one method for such. In addition, the low readability of online resources suggests added emphasis on the need for surgeons to ensure that patients understand the medical information discussed during the presurgical consultations.