Title: [Stacked PAP flap for unilateral breast reconstruction: a case report].
Journal: Handchirurgie, Mikrochirurgie, plastische Chirurgie : Organ der Deutschsprachigen Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Handchirurgie : Organ der Deutschsprachigen Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Mikrochirurgie der Peripheren Nerven und Gefasse : Organ der V... (2023)

Abstract:
BACKGROUND: In recent years, the PAP (profunda artery perforator) flap has gained popularity in reconstructive breast surgery. However, the tissue available for flap harvest is usually limited. Therefore, grafting two PAP flaps to form a stacked PAP flap for unilateral reconstruction of large breasts is a safe and reliable option. Patient We present the case of a 59-year-old patient arriving at our unit with prior bilateral nipple-sparing mastectomy and implant-based reconstruction after diagnosis of BRCA-2 mutation and breast cancer. Autologous reconstruction with a DIEP flap was the initial treatment suggested to our patient. Preoperative CT scans showed subpar perforators not suitable for anastomosis, ultimately resulting in unilateral DIEP flap reconstruction on the left side. After an uneventful postoperative period, the patient requested autologous conversion of the right side due to persistent symptomatic capsular contracture. To achieve symmetry with the contralateral breast, we decided to perform a stacked PAP flap for unilateral breast reconstruction. RESULTS: The combined flaps provided enough tissue to achieve a satisfactory aesthetic result and symmetry and weighed 600 g in total, while the single DIEP flap on the left side weighed 716 g. There were no complications during the surgical procedure. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after seven days. There were no signs of adipose tissue necrosis at the most recent check-up. On the left donor side, there was a small wound healing defect, which healed well non-surgically. The patient was satisfied with the results. CONCLUSION: The PAP flap has become an established alternative to standard breast reconstruction procedures. The stacked PAP flap can provide a safe and efficient method for unilateral reconstruction of large breasts. Perfusion and drainage through the inferiorly anastomosed flap showed sufficient outflow and did not lead to increased adipose tissue necrosis. In our case, the total surgery time was not substantially longer than in single PAP flap surgery. Furthermore, the possibility of unilateral placement of two flaps may avoid follow-up operations such as multiple lipotransfers to equalise both breasts.